# exploring-CAs

I chose to explore the deterministic pattern formations of cellular automata as they were visual and easily understandable. Specifically, my aim was to find a way to identify the set of distinct emergent structures that arise in the CA spacetime dynamics, and to identify the set of initial conditions that map to each distinct structure. 

To achieve this, I had supposed that machine learning would be helpful. I started with the simple task of having a model learn the lookup table for complex CAs. While I eventually achieved this preliminary goal, figuring this out took a while because I threw myself into it with zero experience or background in ML at all. I think that was one of the most practical skills I gained from this project- of learning various deep learning algorithms, their applications, and their implementations in different Python frameworks (such as TensorFlow and PyTorch). Not to mention the valuable experience of building a model, identifying why it is not working, learning new techniques, making changes, and then doing that all over again many times. 

Next, I tried to tackle the  goal of devising some sort of unsupervised semantic segmentation algorithm to distinguish different structures in the spacetime image. The method I thought of was to consider a local window in the CA spacetime and calculate the values of information theoretic measures in that local window. If I do this operation on a window for each cell in the spacetime, it will result in a feature map that will quantify the different patterns or structures that appear throughout the spacetime. However, once I had reached this point, I realized I was stuck. I saw that I did not have a way to exactly check if my information theoretic feature map is correctly identifying the set of distinct structures. 

This is when I found the paper, "Physics-Informed Representation Learning for Emergent Organization in Complex Dynamical Systems", which proposed an unsupervised segmentation algorithm that classified each point in spacetime with local causal states. I implemented the ideas of lightcone construction and local causal equivalence in code and was successfully able to apply it to my interest in CA dynamics. Doing this was the most valuable part of doing this project, as initially, I had not fully understood how these Hidden Markov Models and epsilon-machines applied to real-world systems (simply because the only processes I really analyzed were very simple ones like the Golden Mean Process). However, when I applied it to a system I was studying, everything I learned in the two quarters of classes I took finally clicked. Now, I feel that I have the greater understanding that I need to really dive into systems that are more complicated than Cellular Automata.
